# 2.1 Release Notes

_To be added_

# 2.0 Release Notes

## Accessibility

Brunel is now accessible. By specifying the _accessibility_ flag in `BuilderOptions`
(also by using -accessibility as n option for the command-line tools), then Brunel generates
SVG with Aria roles and labels so as to allow aria compliant screen readers to read the
content of items. The content is currently in English only. Veuillez nous excuser.

Brunel adds region roles to major areas, such as elements (in a multi-element chart),
charts (in a multi-chart visualization), axes and legends. This should allow the user to use
a compliant navigation system to navigate through the major blocks and arrive at the one you
desire rapidly.

The system has been tested with Apple's Voice Over technology, but we are actively looking
for feedback on this feature, particularly how we can improve it to make it more useful for
all people, rather than merely compliant.

High-contrast views can be mostly achieved by use of a custom-designed style sheet. This is
not an area we have addressed in this release.

## X and Y coordinates reverse

You can reverse the X and Y dimension scales by adding a `reverse` option to the definition:

    x(summer) y(winter:reverse)

## Axes

### Gridlines
Gridlines have been brought back in Brunel, and additional syntax added for them.
Previously gridlines were generated by default, but were styled to be invisible.
Also, they didn't work well ...

The new way to request gridlines is to use a `grid` modifier on an `axes()` command
to request them, for example:

    x(summer) y(winter) axes(x:grid, y:grid)
    x(summer) y(winter) axes(x:grid:50, y:grid)
    x(Summer) y(Population:log) axes(x, y:grid)

Standard CSS styling applies to the grid lines; you can set it in the style sheet you use,
or define it either for both sets of gridlines, or individually:

    x(Summer) y(Population) axes(x:grid, y:grid) style('.grid {stroke:green}')
    x(Summer) y(Population) axes(x:grid, y:grid) style('.grid{opacity:1}
       .grid.y {stroke-dasharray:5,5} .grid.x {stroke-width:40px; opacity:0.2}')

### Alignment

`label-location` is now supported on styles for axis title locations, and can be used to place the
axes titles relative to the axis. We have also improved support for large title fonts.
Below is an example of this in operation:

    x(Region) y(dem_rep) transpose tooltip(#all)
    style('.axis .title { fill:red; label-location:right; font-size:60px }')

### Padding and mark sizes

We now support padding in the CSS for text elements associated with axes and legends.
padding, padding-left, padding-right, padding-top and padding-bottom are all supported,
with standard units EXCEPT that we do not support percentage padding.

Here is an example of the use with axes:

    bar x(Winter) y(#count) sort(#count) tooltip(#all) bin(Winter)
    style('.axis .title {fill:red;label-location:left; padding-left:1in}
        .tick{fill:blue;padding:10;padding-right:50px}')

We also now use the css size for the tick mark (`.tick line`) to determmine its size.

The following Brunel is long and ugly, but shows all the styles in action:

    x(winter) y(summer) style('.axis.y .tick text{fill:red;padding-right:10px}')
    title('Ugly Style test')
    style('.axis.x .tick text{fill:blue;font-size:1cm; padding:2mm} .axis .tick line{size:-5mm} ')
    style('.axis .title {label-location:left;font-size:20px}')
    style('.axis .title {label-location:left;font-size:20px;font-style:italic;padding-left:1in}')
    style('.header {fill:red;font-size:40px;padding-bottom:50px;label-location:right}')


## Styles

Elements that have been selected now have the css class 'selection' defined for them.
This allows you to use style definitions for custom display of selected elements, as
in the below:

    point x(Longitude) y(Latitude) color(region) size(population:1000%)
    style('.selected {opacity:0.5; stroke-opacity:1; stroke-width:2; stroke-dasharray:2 2}
    .element {opacity:0.2}') interaction(select:mouseover)

Labels for elements that are selected also have the `selected` class defined, so you
can modify selected labels' appearances using styles. In this version, we only
support one position modifier -- `vertical-align`. If this value is set to a pixel value
(such as `20px` or `-30px`) it will move the text the indicated amount AFTER placement

Here is a long sample with a lot of styling going on for text:

    data('sample:whiskey.csv') bar x(category) y(#count) transpose
    size(#selection:[20%, 80%]) sort(#count:ascending) label(category) axes(y)
    style('.label.selected {fill:yellow; text-shadow:0px 0px 4px black; vertical-align:18px; text-transform:uppercase}')
    style('label-location:outside-top-right; text-align:end; padding:1px')
    interaction(select:mouseover)

Another modification was done to how we hand overlapping data labels; previously they were
removed from the display, but now they are given the class `overlap` which our default
style sheet hides, but you can modify to treat any way you want. For example:

    data('sample:whiskey.csv') point x(Age) y(Price) label(category:5)
    style('.overlap {visibility:visible; text-shadow:none; opacity:0.2}')

## Axis ranges

The initial range of a numeric field can be set by defining a range for the `x` or `y`
command, much like a transform. Examples are:

    point x(Longitude:[-100, -80]) y(Latitude:[35, 45])

## Guides

We have added a new feature to allow an element to define a guide. This is described more fully in
the complete documentation, but here is an example showing its use:

    x(winter) y(summer) + guide(y:40+x, y:70, y:'70+10*sin(x)')
    style('.guide1{stroke:red} .guide3 {stroke-dasharray:none}')

## Interactions
A new `animate` command has been added that provides an interactive control to animate a visualization over
the values of a continuous field.  As part of this, labels on continuous filters have improved (particularly for date fields).

The `interaction(select)` command and also the new callback event command `interaction(call:func)`
can now take an event name parameter `snap` that allows interactivity to be fired when the
mouse is near a data item on screen

`interaction(call:func)` has been added; the ability to call bak to a javascript function to handle
events in special ways. A new page in the documentation describes the API.

`interaction(panzoom)` can now take options `x`, `y`, `xy`, `auto` as well as `none` which allow
 detailed control of how panning and zooming operate

 Panning and zooming now work for diagrams as well as charts based on scales; the zooming keeps
 fonts and point sizes fixed (not a simple graphical zoom) so zooming in will show better labels
 and make features clearer when applicable.


## Notebooks

R Notebooks (IRkernel) no longer require use of a web service.  Simply install Brunel Visualization directly into R and enjoy.

## Minor fixes

 * Wrapped text in Firefox browsers has been improved to compensate for the difference in
   how FF calculates text height.

 * Choice of date format to use in legends and other cases has been improved

 * Better choice of precision to show numeric values in labels and tooltips

 * Expanded the use of "M" millions scaling

 * Zooming and panning has been restricted so you cannot scroll or pan too far from the data space.
   This feature can be disabled by holding down the ALT or OPTION key while zooming to allow
   unrestricted pan and zoom.

 * Chord charts clip text that does not fit into the labels rather than simply dropping it







# 1.2 Release Notes

## Maps

Maps has undergone a major set of improvements, mostly internal, but the following
changes should be noted:

 * Instead of GeoJSON files, we are now using the more efficient topoJSON format.
   (https://github.com/mbostock/topojson/wiki). This makes maps download speed much
   faster

 * The `map` command now accepts an option parameter for the level of detail of the
   map polygons. The possible values are `high`, `medium`, and `low` with medium being
   the default. In general, `medium` assumes a 800x800 pixel display space with about
   10x zooming still looking good. `low` assumes a smaller space with very little
   zooming (but the zooming is way faster!) and `high` is as much detail as we have
   available.

 * We have improved the name look up routines so they now accept a much wider
   choice of names for a country, including non-english names.

 * Axes for maps are supported and generate a graticule for the map. The number of
   divisions is dynamically calculated

 * Look has improved

## Labels

 * Labels are now automatically thinned so they are not shown all on top of each other.   This is dynamic, so as you zoom in, more labels will be shown if now possible

## Notebooks

Some of the changes in version 1.2 may cause graphs in existing notebooks to not appear immediately. If this happens try executing all cells, then reloading the browser page.  There may be other issues when upgrading.  More information and work-arounds are in [this git issue](https://github.com/Brunel-Visualization/Brunel/issues/98)

* Python:  Added support for pandas DataFrame index.  If the index has a label, it can be referenced in the Brunel as a field.
* Toree:  Update to magic now requires Toree dev8 or later

## Miscellaneous

* `filter()` may now  contain default values for each field.  See "Interactivity" section in online documentation for examples.
*  Added new action to add graph titles and footnotes:  `title("A Title")`.  See "Titles, Guides and Style" section in online docs.
*  Animated entrances in new `effect()` command.  See "Interactivity" section of online docs.

## Integrators

* Note that a new JS file is required:  `//cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/topojson/1.6.20/topojson.min.js`







# 1.1 Release Notes

# Java version

Although informally true before, the official version of Java supported is Java 7.
Java 8 should also work fine, but primary testing will done on 1.7


# Minor Improvements
Axes on Smaller charts show fewer ticks, reducing overlapping.

Summmarization has been permitted for the x axis, so we can write `x(income) color(region) mean(income)` for example.

Fit and smooth operations now work for categorical data, both on the X and Y dimensions.
Categories are treated as ordered, and those category orders are used in the calculations.

# Support for lists of items

If a field has string values separated by commas, these values will be autoconverted
into an internal list object. This will not change functionality significantly,
but it allows the use of a new summary operator `each(x)` which splits up the list
into multiple rows. As an example:

Raw data

        A   B
        0   a,b,c
        0   a,c
        1   a,c,b

Transformed by `each(B)`

        A   B
        0   a
        0   b
        0   c
        0   a
        0   c
        1   a
        1   c
        1   b

Transformed and summarized using the Brunel `x(B) y(#count) each(B)`

        B   #count
        a   3
        b   2
        c   3

# Notebooks

Added support for Python 2 Notebooks.






# 1.0 Release Notes

## Maps

Brunel now supports maps, using an intelligent matching feature and an online atlas of world regions.
maps can be specified by name by requesting a given map in the `map` command, or Brunel will find a suitable
set of maps for a given data column.

By specifying a `key` field, that field is matched against Brunel's database of known regions and is used
to generate maps. Key features of mapping are:

 * Maps can have multiple layers, each specified as an element using the `+` notation
 * Key names can be used to create maps, or explicit latitude/longitude can be defined
 * By default, Brunel chooses which set of features will make a suitable map based on the key data
 * Brunel chooses a suitable projection based on the regions to be displayed
 * Maps elements default to polygonal features, but specifying `point` or `text` converts the element to
   one of that type, with all the usual features
 * By adding the additional element `map(labels)` maps are automatically labeled with suitable labels
   taking into account the scaling of the map.

The region and name data that back the map feature are courtesy of the public domain data sets found in the
Natural Earth repository (Free vector and raster map data @ naturalearthdata.com).

## Networks

The `edge` element is now more fully supported, as is the `network` diagram. This allows the creation of node
and link diagrams, by default using D3's force layout method. These diagrams:

 * Animate as they are laid out
 * Allow node dragging using force-directed updates
 * Use point elements for the nodes, allowing color, size and labeling as usual for such an element
 * Use edge elements for the links, allowing color and size to be used

Two dataset are usually required, one for the nodes and one for the edges. However, a single data set can be used
for the edges if there is little no extra data for the nodes. The nodes can be generated form the edges by combining
them as you would a series, for example: `edge key(a,b) + y(a,b) label(#values)` will generate a labeled graph from
a single dataset consisting only of edges from column _a_ to column _b_.

## Spark/Scala Notebooks

This release adds support for Scala/Spark Jupyter Notebooks using the Apachee Toree kernel.  See the notes in the [spark-kernel](https://github.com/Brunel-Visualization/Brunel/tree/master/spark-kernel) project for details.

## Other New Features

 * Improved axis options. `axis(...)` now takes options `x`, `y`, `none` or both `x` and `y` as options.
   Options `x` and `y` can take optional parameters that are numeric (to hint at the number of ticks
   desired for a numeric axis) or string (to give a title to an axis, with the empty string '' suppressing titles)
 * Improved the algorithm for shortening labels (using `label(field:N)` where _N_ is the desired text length)
 * Clustering is now allowed; specifying two _x_ dimensions where the first is categorical will place the
   second dimensions within the first as a clustered X axis

## Fixes

 * Improved labeling for diagrams ensures labels are not "lost" when diagram structure animates
 * Labels in transposed charts work as expected
 * Some defects with tooltip locations resolved

## Future

 The use of `:: data` in notebooks is deprecated; it continues to be supported in 1.0, but will go away
 in the next version. The language command `data(...)` should be used instead.
